The quantity and quality of your carb intake are both important factors to consider when making dietary changes to help prevent diabetes.

Your body breaks down carbs into small sugar molecules, which are absorbed into your bloodstream. The resulting rise in blood sugar stimulates your pancreas to produce insulin, a hormone that helps sugar move from your bloodstream into your cells.

In people with prediabetes, the body’s cells are resistant to insulin, so blood sugar remains high. To compensate, the pancreas produces more insulin, attempting to bring blood sugar down.

Over time, this can lead to progressively higher blood sugar and insulin levels until the condition turns into type 2 diabetes.

Many studies link frequent added sugar or refined carb intake and diabetes risk. What’s more, replacing these items with foods that have less of an effect on blood sugar may reduce your risk.

However, all carb sources — not just sugar and refined carbs — stimulate the release of insulin. Although refined carbs are digested more rapidly than complex carbs, there’s mixed evidence that a food’s blood sugar increase is correlated with diabetes risk.

Therefore, managing overall carb intake and choosing carbs that are high in fiber are likely better solutions for preventing diabetes than just limiting highly processed carbs.

Examples of foods and drinks high in added sugars or refined carbs include soda, candy, dessert, white bread, pasta, and sweetened breakfast cereal.

Non-starchy vegetables like broccoli and mushrooms, whole fruit, oatmeal, and whole grain bread and pasta are healthier swaps. These options are higher in fiber, which helps mitigate spikes in blood sugar.

Lean proteins like fish and healthy fats from olive oil, avocado, nuts, and seeds also have less of an effect on blood sugar. They’re great additions to your diet to help prevent type 2 diabetes.

SUMMARY
Eating foods high in refined carbs and sugar increase blood sugar and insulin levels, which may eventually lead to diabetes. Limiting total carbohydrate intake and choosing options that don’t cause blood sugar spikes may help reduce your risk.